[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: The
subject of parallel realities
is emerging more and more
prominent in our conversation
as we begin to understand the
complex nature of reality.
When it crosses over
into the dreamworld,
it becomes really interesting.
Author Robert Moss
has given us yet
even more to think about in this
book, "Mysterious Realities."
It recounts experiences of both
parallel existences and dream
time, where they
clash and cross over.
And this is such a fun book.
>>ROBERT MOSS:
Thank you, Regina.
Great to be with you.
>>REGINA: I mean, it's
kind of outrageous.
It has a lot of
outrageous stuff in there.
And so first of all,
I've interviewed
you a couple of other times.
We've stayed very pointed on the
subject of dreams and methods
and so forth.
But this is a collection
of stories that
are of your own experience.
And what prompted you
to write this book?
>>MOSS: Well, I
think they're fun.
I think they are entertaining.
And I think they're
illuminating in the sense
that they can provoke people
into thinking about what
is possible for them.
You know, you go dreaming.
What does that mean?
Does it just mean that
what you ate last night
is commenting on the
state of your digestion?
Or does it mean that maybe
you traveled to another world?
Or maybe someone from
another world visited you?
So it is to break
open the carapace
of our limited thinking
about these things.
You know, science tells
us as a hypothesis,
we're living right now
in the many worlds,
in the nested parallel universe.
This is a popular
thesis in science.
>>REGINA: This is
very hard for people
to get their minds around.
>>MOSS: That's right.
>>REGINA: In terms of our
visceral understanding.
Go ahead and explain
it the way you see it,
and science sees it, and
where that crosses over.
>>MOSS: When whoever
came up with this thesis
many years ago, he was
laughed out of court.
But today physics thinks
it's quite tenable
that we are living right now in
uncountable parallel universes.
And there's a universe
right next to us
where you and I are not talking
at Gaia, et cetera, et cetera.
But as you say, how do we get
our heads around that notion?
What does it mean
to us if it's true?
Well dreaming is one of the
ways to explore firsthand
the possible reality
of the many worlds.
If you monitor your
dreams and journal
them over time, if you
have dreams you remember,
you might notice that
again and again, you're
in a situation which is not
exactly your present life
right.
You're still with your former
partner or in your former job.
And that could mean
that part of you
stayed behind through what
shamans call soul loss.
But it also means
that part of you
is living on that
parallel track having
made a choice you didn't make.
What good is it to
understand this?
Well sometimes we
discover that we
can harvest lessons and gifts
from our parallel selves who
might have done something
we haven't done.
There's that parallel
you who became
the musician or the artist
when you thought you just had
to earn money and do the job.
Maybe you can reach to
that parallel self who
has those creative
gifts, and bring those
into your present life.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Oh gosh, I mean, I could be
so rude and totally Bogart
the mic here and say, oh,
I remember this dream,
I remember that.
But I am going to try to
zip it and not do that.
But I will say one thing,
if I may, before we launch
into these incredible stories.
I notice in the dream
world, this one thing
I've always been intrigued with
is there is an alternate world.
In my case, I go to an alternate
world that's like Earth
but not exactly like Earth.
Everything's different to scale.
You're capable of
different things.
There's a city within a
city that I know well.
I even know which shops to go
to in that city, which cafes.
And it's buried in the
middle of another city.
And each time in the dream
it's like, oh my home,
I'm in Rome this time.
There's the wall to my city.
So I'm just saying I
have had a lifetime
of going into these parallel--
I thought it was
dreamworld, but it appears
it's just a parallel reality.
>>MOSS: Regina, you've
got a wonderful book.
And you are a shopper's
guide to alternate realities.
>>REGINA: It's crazy.
>>MOSS: It has to be done.
>>REGINA: Bakeries
in particular.
>>MOSS: Yes.
Well you know, there's a
phrase, the imaginable realm.
It's not a household phrase
yet but it might become one.
It means that there
realms of true imagination
where there are
cities and temples
and palaces and shopping malls
created by human imagination
over the centuries, over
the millennia actually.
And they're arguably
not less real or not
much less real
than anything made
of bricks and mortar and
glass and steel in this world
that we live in.
And actually shamans,
creators, mystics have always
wanted to go to these
places, these places
of true imagination.
So a lot of my stories
in "Mysterious Realities"
are about travels
in this architecture
of non-ordinary reality.
>>REGINA: So how do we know?
Like in that case,
how would I know
if I'm dropping into just
a constant parallel reality
that I dip into, or if it's an
imaginary realm that I created?
Or is there any
difference anyway?
>>MOSS: There may not
be that much difference.
Because I mean,
everything in the world
that we're talking in
right now is the product
actually of human
imagination and intersecting
with the materials
of the planet Earth.
There's no building
on the planet Earth
that is not the result of
imagination, for example.
So it's the same in non-ordinary
reality, ultimate reality.
And arguably, there
are structures there
that are older than
the Eiffel Tower,
older than the pyramids that
have been constructed again
by imagination.
These include the environments
we go when we die.
They include the bardo states,
the transitional zones.
So all of this is
quite interesting
if you want to know something
about your options after death.
I'm very interested
in that subject.
I find the people who have some
kind of firsthand experience
or idea about what
happens after death tend
to approach the
challenges of this life
with more courage
and clarity and even
a sense of divine comedy.
So some of my stories are
about, let's get humorous
about what happens after death.
Let's have a look at it.
Let's not be too drab
and mournful about it,
but let's be brave enough
to take a good look.
>>REGINA: Well what a
wonderful segue because we're
going right up to
something you thought
might have been your death
at one point in time.
We're going to go through--
I've chosen a few stories
in the because obviously we
can't cover them all or this
would be a six part mini
series.
So given the
constraints of time,
let's start with the
storytelling of crows.
And I thought, did this
really happen to you?
Happened in an airport.
Let's set the stage.
>>MOSS: Well the story as
told in "Mysterious Realities"
starts with me slipping at
Sea-Tac Airport, Seattle
Airport.
And my body is horizontal
above a hard surface.
And it's going to
come down very hard.
And I can hear people screaming.
But it's as if there's
a giant hand that
is sustaining me and holding
me up, breaking this fall.
And in this moment,
I go off into if you
like an imaginary
world in which I
am talking as if
I've been pulled out
of my body for a while.
And I'm talking to one of my
preferred forms of the death
lord, Yama.
Yama well-known in
India and in the east.
And I'm having a
conversation with the Yama
who is not in a good
mood to begin with.
He is showing himself as a
sort of steaming mountain
with boar tusks and all
sorts of other appendages--
not very nice at all.
We have an interview about
what would make it worthwhile
for me to be allowed to go
on living in this earth.
And what Yama basically
tells me is you
must go on making stories
that entertain death.
So I guess that's the real
answer to your opening
question.
I wrote this book because
these are stories that I
think entertain my death.
And as the story unfolds,
there are episodes from my life
and different realities.
And I want to share one that
took place on an airplane,
flying back from that
airport where I had the fall.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And also at some point tie
into the storytelling songs
of a dead dreamer.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: This is
an important part.
Now weave it all together.
>>MOSS: OK.
So back to Sea-Tac Airport.
I'm stopping at the
newsstand and they've
got an interesting collection
of Penguin Classics.
And there's one called
"Songs Of A Dead Dreamer."
I've never heard of this book.
It's a collection
of horror stories
by an author unknown to me.
But I can't resist the title.
The cover is gruesome,
but I can't resist.
So in my hand is "Songs
Of The Dead Dream."
But when I suddenly slip
on a spill of liquid,
I'm horizontal above
the hard surface.
Come down hard.
And people gathered around
when I come back from my--
>>REGINA: About to
become a dead dreamer.
>>MOSS: --when I come
back from my sort of close
to death experience,
people are gathered.
Should we call 9-1-1?
I think I'm OK, I say.
I get up.
I'm slightly sore
along one of my sides,
but really I haven't
suffered anything much.
It's incomprehensible.
It was a really hard fall.
But I'm fine.
>>REGINA: And you're a big guy.
You're tall.
>>MOSS: I'm a big guy.
And I should have
damaged something.
But it was like one
of those moments
when you feel rejuvenated.
Something the deeper reality
has reached into your world
and grabbed you to
get your attention.
In the experience of
coincidence or synchronicity,
we often feel this.
It doesn't have to be
as dramatic as my fall
on that airport concourse.
But don't we feel that?
When interesting
synchronicity is happening,
we feel that
something is reaching
through the curtains of
our ordinary understanding
to tickle us awake,
or mess up our hair,
or pull something from under
us to get our attention,
to push us forward
or pull us back.
I felt at that moment that
something had literally
reached into my reality,
pulled me into another reality
to remind me of something
fundamental about my life
assignment right now, and
then laid me down gently.
So the physical
body was still OK.
It felt like one of
those interventions.
And I would say the intervention
from my point of view
was by no less than
my personal death.
Communicated with me.
>>REGINA: Now let's
talk about what
happens on the return trip.
>>MOSS: On the return
trip, I'm wondering
what's going to happen
next, of course.
I play this game on
airplanes all the time.
It's part of my survival
strategy as a frequent flyer.
What story is this
flight going to get me?
And the story looks
almost over the top.
There's a very tall
woman, her height
increased by her high heeled
black boots and her top hat
that has capping her outfit.
Black leather over a bustier.
>>REGINA: That's in this
dimension in reality,
on the airplane with you.
>>MOSS: This is in
physical reality.
>>REGINA: When I was reading
it, I thought, I'm confused.
Was she in his
imagination or what?
>>MOSS: This is
exactly playing out.
It's not hyped at all.
The story is told in
a just-so fashion.
>>REGINA: So she
has a top hat on.
>>MOSS: She's got a top hat.
>>REGINA: High books.
>>MOSS: Black leather.
High heeled high boots.
And of course she
sits down next to me.
And she parks a small
rotund guy by the window.
She's sitting next to me.
And she's sniffing.
And she looks around and says,
I rather like this flight.
And I look at her.
This is the start
of the conversation.
All the seats are full.
Don't you know, if the plane
is going to crash actuarially,
20% of the seats will be empty.
This is what she says to me
to start the conversation.
So I look at her
outfit more closely.
And she's wearing clothes
with big death's heads
on the back of the gloves.
And I've been thinking
about death and my--
>>REGINA: Well, you have your
dead dreamer right there.
>>MOSS: --arrangement
with death.
And the conversation
is sort of gusting.
She reveals she's a dominatrix.
It's not really my scene.
So after that, things
are silent for a while
and then we pick up.
She wants creme de menthe.
They don't have it.
She's having double vodka.
Then she says to me,
with knowing nothing
about me in ordinary reality--
do you think the dead
talk to us in our dreams?
I say, absolutely.
Oh, good, she says.
My dead ex-husband turned
up last week in my dream.
He stood over my bed and he
said I've got a great job.
I'm making movies
and doing music--
the dreams that are being made
for people in film studios
on the other side.
I really love my job making
dream movies for people
to watch in the night.
So this is good.
We have a conversation
about that.
I still haven't identified
myself in any way.
But let's cut to the chase.
She says, I love
crows and ravens.
Of course you do,
my dear, I say.
>>REGINA: No surprise.
>>MOSS: Do you know
there's a collective noun
for a group of crows or ravens?
Oh, yes, I'm very proud.
It's a murder of crows,
an unkindness of ravens.
Everybody knows that, she says.
There's one word
that applies to both.
Do you know what it is?
You're going to tell me.
Yes, I am, dear--
a storytelling of crows,
a storytelling of ravens.
Do you know why this is
the name for a collective
of these black birds?
You're going to tell me.
Yes, I am, because
you need to hear this.
I once saw this.
I saw a storytelling
crows gathered
around a crow that was trying
to entertain them with a story.
He was a poor storyteller.
When he finished, they
pecked him to death.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
I remember that in the book.
>>MOSS: And I have
my deal with my death
to go on producing stories
that are entertaining Death.
And she's telling me
a story about crows--
black birds,
harbingers of death--
which involves the
penalty for failing
to be an entertaining
storyteller.
So once again, the real
reason I composed this book,
or put it together for
my experiences, is--
>>REGINA: You had the fear
of the crows put it in.
>>MOSS: Yes, the
crows made me do it.
>>REGINA: [CHUCKLES] I love it.
And you have done it
successfully, I want to say.
And I think one thing
that just popped out
there-- people are saying,
whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, what?
And that-- well, there
are a lot of things.
But one of them
was this notion--
actuarially speaking.
Not actually speaking--
>>MOSS: Actuarially.
>>REGINA: Speaking
as an actuary, which
is someone who really knows how
to crunch numbers and ratios.
>>MOSS: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: Is that true?
Where did that come from?
That's interesting because
that indicates something else.
If 20% of the seats are empty
on flights that go down,
that means somehow, some people
got somewhere and probably
canceled at the last minute
not to be on that flight.
>>MOSS: Right.
I did not fact-check
the dominatrix
with the deaths on gloves.
>>REGINA: I just find
that interesting.
>>MOSS: But I have seen--
I've seen similar information
in news reports over the years.
I did not fact-check
that version.
>>REGINA: OK, just wondering.
>>MOSS: But I've heard
things like that.
And I think there is a
certain body of evidence
that there will be empty seats
when the plane or the train,
or something else
is going to crash.
>>REGINA: So if you're on
a packed flight-- good,
because we're flying out today.
So all, right, now--
>>MOSS: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
So now we know why you did
this, why this book exists.
You're here to tell
stories in such a way
that you're not, essentially,
pecked to death, right?
So that's your job.
>>MOSS: Wonderful summary.
>>REGINA: Now let's
go on to a next--
let's go on to the
next story I chose.
I mean, there are
many, many stories.
Because I found this
absolutely fascinating--
you visited, in Hampstead,
right, in England--
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: --in
London, Hampstead?
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: You visited
the final home of Freud.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: He's not
exactly who I thought
he was by your
rendering of this story.
Please tell us about this
man who is much more complex,
who claims to be
an atheist, and yet
is surrounded by very unusual
artifacts, lots of them.
>>MOSS: It is-- you
can actually visit
Freud's last home
in Hampstead and you
can see this for yourself.
In his house, his
last house, are
about 2,000 miniature statues
of deities and spirits
from many cultures, particularly
from the ancient Mediterranean,
ancient Egypt, that part of
the world, but also from China,
and other places.
He called these his
old and grubby gods.
He would go nowhere
without them.
In Vienna, before he had
to flee, he had 3,000.
He managed to bring
2,000 to London.
He would not travel
without a selection
of his divine statues,
a suitcase full.
When he was consulting
with a client,
he would arrange the
answerers, as he sometimes
called them, the statues, the
embodied, spirited statues--
the breathing images,
the Greeks called them--
who would counsel him on his
relationship with a patient.
Sometimes, if he was
dealing with a tricky case,
he'd station a particular
divine statue between him
and the patient
to keep a border,
to keep some kind
of guardianship
over the situation.
So he might have been a godless
Jew, as he called himself,
but he did firmly believe
to and adhere to what he
called his old and grubby gods.
And in this story, I write about
his actually very affectionate
relationship with
an image of Horus,
which there's history here.
He did have an image of
Horus, which is probably
a counterfeit in the sense
it wasn't from ancient Egypt.
It was from the 19th century
made by a very good faker.
And in the story,
Freud's affection
for the image of
Horus is strong.
And we know that in his dreams
of what happened to his parents
after death, he saw Horus
as a guide, an escort,
so we know he had a
certain sympathy for Horus.
In the story, it is brought
to Freud's attention
that his statue is
probably a fake,
but he basically says,
no, no, it's for real.
This is how gods are made.
They're made by your belief.
They're made by your faith.
So it's very interesting
to me that Freud, whatever
his umbrella ideology, in
practice, talked to his gods,
to the embodied image of the
gods the way the ancients did.
Because all of these
statues were made for use.
They were made as conveyances.
They were made as vehicles
for the gods and the spirits
to speak to humans and
interact with them.
And Freud used them exactly
the way in ancient pagan
would have done.
>>REGINA: And that, to me,
was absolutely fascinating.
What he really meant is
I'm not a practicing--
a member of the practicing
Judeo-Christian faith.
>>MOSS: Right.
>>REGINA: That's
what he was saying.
>>MOSS: Right.
>>REGINA: Not that I'm godless.
He was deeply entrenched
with the gods.
Obviously, they
were guiding him,
and they were even used
as divination tools,
almost, for him.
>>MOSS: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Thank you
for sharing that.
I find that absolutely
fascinating.
And like you said, he used to
carry this one little kind of--
I think you said
reddish version of what
turned out to be a fake,
apparently, of Horus.
And he carried it
with him at all times
as the great protector god.
And he said-- in
your book, the way
you position it is, it
doesn't matter if it's a fake.
I gave him life.
>>MOSS: Well--
>>REGINA: My belief
gave him life.
>>MOSS: Yes, these things are--
these things like "The
Velveteen Rabbit" story.
These things are ensouled.
They're inspirited by
belief, by faith, by love.
>>REGINA: Yes, they are.
And I'm going to go to
another one that has
to do with statues and spirits.
Because this story, I was
kind of horrified at first,
but I start laughing.
And that has to do with
you and our great goddess.
You'll never be
disrespectful to her again--
Artemis.
>>MOSS: You are making
me really nervous now.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
I want to go there next.
>>MOSS: OK.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about what happened.
This story starts in Istanbul
and it ends in Greece,
if I recall, right?
>>MOSS: Well, it's played
out in the Greek part
of what is now Turkey.
It's basically played out in
the Western part of Turkey.
>>REGINA: OK, thank you.
>>MOSS: It's played out at
Ephesus, the famous city
of the great goddess Artemis.
And it's denouement is played
out not far from Izmir,
a famous seaport
on the Aegean Sea.
And it's a very
self-mocking story.
It's the story of my getting
myself into mythic trouble.
>>REGINA: Yes, and I'm
trying to remember her name.
I have it somewhere here, but
I'm hopping all over myself.
The woman that you were with--
I love that.
OK, what is her name?
It starts with an A.
>>MOSS: I called her
Asli in the story.
>>REGINA: Asli.
OK, yes.
>>MOSS: I called her
Asli in the story.
So it probably really begins at
the ancient temple of Apollo,
in these parts.
And I'm there with
some of my group, who
I'm going to lead a workshop.
And there aren't
many tourists around,
so I say, let's chant the words
that awaken an ancient god.
So we're chanting, in ancient
Greek, words to awaken Apollo.
And a Dutch friend
of the group says,
Robert, aren't
there consequences
for awakening old gods?
And I say, in my madness,
don't worry, dear boy.
They're family.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>MOSS: Now think what it
means to announce that you're
family with the
Greek gods, who were
known as the most dysfunctional
family in all of literature.
It might have begun there.
So then, we were at
the museum in Ephesus,
which has the famous many
breasts that-- if they
are breasts.
There's great discussion
about what they are.
But this huge figure, this
famous figure of Artemis,
of Ephesus, who's not exactly
the Greek Artemis with the bow
and arrow and the deer.
She's something more.
She's also the mountain mother.
He's also Cybele.
She's also-- she's many things.
She's the great goddess.
And whether these are figs, or
bulls testicles, or breasts,
or whatever, she
is a potent deity.
And she's wearing a whole city,
or a whole nation on her head
as a crown.
And opposite in the museum is
another version of the goddess,
appearing somewhat
younger, somewhat daintier,
somewhat more elegant,
somewhat more beautiful.
And I'm standing between the
two living statues worshipped
by hundreds of thousands of
people that have received
their prayers, and I say,
pointing at the younger one,
I think this is the one I'm
going to ask out for dinner.
The Turks in the room gasp.
The Turkish woman gasps.
Her color changes.
Robert, she says, do you
know what you just did?
You just insulted-- you just
insulted a deity worshipped
by people for
thousands of years.
Oh, yes, I did make a--
I did sort of overdo it.
It was just a cavalier remark.
It was just a casual remark.
I'm a boy, I'm like that.
Well--
>>REGINA: Just a lad.
>>MOSS: --there
are consequences.
One of the animals
with which are Artemis,
in both the Greek and the
Anatolian forms associate,
is the boar.
She's also associated
with the bear.
But we are down
on the beach the--
>>REGINA: Now, wait a minute.
Asli had-- she had a tea--
or she was reading her coffee
grounds--
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: --right, before
you went to the beach, right?
>>MOSS: That's true, yes.
You're good.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I do remember
some things pretty well
because I was engaged.
OK, and as she read them,
she saw the image of a boar--
>>MOSS: She saw the image of a--
>>REGINA: --and she shuddered.
>>MOSS: She saw the image
of a boar, a wild pig.
And the Greeks used to say
in the famous book on dream
interpretation by Artemidorus--
from which Freud borrowed his
title--
Artemidorus says, when
the goddess is enraged,
takes the form of a boar.
When women are enraged, they
can be as wild as a she-boar.
So some of us are on the
beach shortly after this.
And it's a beach where
there are wild boar,
but the wild boar have never
been a problem for humans.
They've always coexisted.
But as we're making a picnic,
a wild boar runs at me--
my back is turned--
and bites me.
It doesn't tusk
me, but it bites me
over the second chakra at the
back, making a very big hole--
>>REGINA: Near your kidneys.
>>MOSS: --and a
very large bruise.
And people are running
around, beating the boar away.
And the keeper of
the beach chair
says, I've worked
here for 20 years.
No boars ever attacked
a human until now.
Oh, things are
happening differently.
When I eventually go
to a pharmacy and--
>>REGINA: But didn't he-- did
he try to attack you again?
Did he come back after you?
>>MOSS: He seemed interested.
But by this point, there's
a very, very dominant
Turkish woman with a big
stick who's keeping him away.
>>REGINA: OK, so she's
getting him more off your--
>>MOSS: But he's still
sniffing around-- or he or she.
He or she is still
sniff-- probably she--
is still sniffing around.
So I felt, in the most
intimate and personal way,
the anger of the goddess.
I had been bitten deeply--
not tusk, but bitten deeply
over the second chakra
by an animal associated
with the great goddess.
So I realized I have
to make reparations.
I have to make up for this.
>>REGINA: Well, you also were
stung by a bee after that.
>>MOSS: I was stung
by a bee, but that
seemed to be natural medicine.
>>REGINA: That was-- and so
that was the immune system.
>>MOSS: Turkish
doctor on the beach
said that it's as if the
bee decided to give you
some immediate emergency help.
>>REGINA: Yeah, which is cool.
>>MOSS: So notice, we
are in the mythic realm.
There's a complete interface,
a complete field of interaction
between mythic forces and
ordinary human forces,
and it's playing out
in my life because
of a cavalier, idiotic
remark made in a museum.
But I have to--
I have to pay up now.
I have to make reparations.
So I went and I made
apologies to the goddess
and I offered gifts
of to the goddess.
I offered bread to the
god-- a gift of grain
to the goddess of the earth.
And I invoked the support
of other feminine deities
that have helped me, and
Athena and her allies
were very helpful to me.
And I went to her
sanctuary at Priene,
and I felt at home there.
So it's a self-mocking
story about the consequences
of not realizing that these
forces are still alive.
>>REGINA: Yes, because
you-- and you were humble.
You said, I've been a silly boy.
>>MOSS: Been a silly boy.
I was a silly boy.
>>REGINA: And when
you think about that,
and the whole
notion of egregores,
certainly there can't be any
more prominent example of them
than the entities that permeate
these statues that have long
been regarded and honored
and worshipped and feared.
So whether you're invoking
the original spirit,
if that original spirit is still
attached to a-- permeating that
particular piece of artwork,
or whether it's as you would--
imaginal realm versus
the dream realm,
or whether this is
now a collectively
rendered reality, an entity
that we, as human beings have
created, is kind of irrelevant.
It has its own life.
It has its own mind and
its own force, right?
>>MOSS: That's very
well said, and thank you
for the word egregore.
It was invented by
Victor Hugo, the poet,
because he needed
a rhyme in a verse.
It didn't exist until he
decided to give us this word.
>>REGINA: I didn't that
was origin of the word.
>>MOSS: That's the origin of
the word, but, of course--
>>REGINA: Which is an entity.
>>MOSS: Yes, of course, it's a--
>>REGINA: It's a created entity.
>>MOSS: --collective
thought form,
in a sense, some sometimes
anchored in and pinned
to a particular form, a
statue or something like that.
But it's a collective
thought form.
And these collective
thought forms
are active in our
lives in many ways.
We talked about the consequences
of saying silly words
in front of an ancient statue.
But we see the potency
of the egregores,
of collective thought
forms, in all sorts of ways.
We see them in bad
ways-s bringing
racism and hatred
and dark forces,
et cetera, as we've seen
recurringly in human history.
So we do need to think about and
understand how human thoughts
and groups of people
sharing the same thought
generate forms that have
their own psychic life,
their own autonomy.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Because think about it,
Robert, look at even right
now in the United States
and around the world where
we have very kind of
prominent leaders,
once we have an
opinion established
en masse about that leader,
or a rock star, anyone that's
prominent, all of that
energy is projected
into that living persona.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: And then
what happens to them
if they're interfacing with
our collectively created sort
of imaginable entity, of sorts?
How does that
affect a human being
who has their own persona?
>>MOSS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I've often wondered
how do those two meet?
How do our beliefs
projected en masse
onto another human
being affect them?
>>MOSS: Well, I
think many of us are
living inside the
bubbles of reality
created by thought
forms, or sustained
by thought forms of this kind.
And when you think about
what to do about them,
my mind actually runs off to
the old "Ghostbusters" movie.
Remember?
There's this horrible
collective demonic being
that's going to manifest
in the streets of the city.
You give it a ridiculous shape.
You shape-shift it.
You will it and wish it to
take a form that's manageable.
Maybe we need to
think about that.
Maybe we think about-- need
to think about not so much
darkly demonizing these
forces we don't like,
but making them so absolutely
preposterous and ridiculous
that they sort of
self-destruct, self-implode
because nobody, really,
can believe them anymore.
>>REGINA: I think
you should have
the platform for just a
few moments, as in "The Day
That the Earth Stood Still,"
and present this globally.
These things that we
resent and the things
that we are putting so much
negative and dark energy into,
let's turn them into
something almost comedic.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: And it would be
interesting to see how life
would--
literally have the feeling
of life would change.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: It would have to.
>>MOSS: I'm a great
proponent of comedy.
I think that actually, many
of us have in our lives
might recognize
a moment where we
have the choice of living the
genre of tragedy or of comedy.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: I chose
comedy some time ago.
And I think when we look at the
worst things that are going on
in our world, it can be very
difficult to find any humor
in the situation to begin with.
But by finding that humor and
shape-shifting the reality,
in a comedic sense, that
makes preposterous what
might otherwise be terrifying,
we might find a way forward.
>>REGINA: I think so.
A different kind of
egregore based on comedy--
I love it.
OK, now we're
speaking of entities.
Now we're in the realm
of another being.
And explain how this--
did you end up calling
it a daimon or daemon?
>>MOSS: It's very rude
to call it a demon.
>>REGINA: Yes, I know.
>>MOSS: Demon is the
ancient pronunciation,
but because of the
church, we can't say that.
>>REGINA: D-A-I-M-O-N.
>>MOSS: D-A-I-M-O-N.
I like to say daimon.
It might be more
correct to say daemon.
But basically, it's your call.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>MOSS: So I like to say daimon.
>>REGINA: So let's talk about
this particular daimon and how
this came to be--
this story came to be.
>>MOSS: Well, I'm
possibly the most lunar
man you'll ever meet.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Lunar, OK.
>>MOSS: Most lunar--
I'm not saying lunatic,
but most lunar.
I've always felt
a strong affinity
for the astral
realm of the Moon.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: And I've
always felt myself
able to have some
degree of engagement
with spirits, intelligences
that live in that realm.
It's a mixed role.
>>REGINA: Which
is an Earth realm.
I mean, it is an
Earth transit path.
>>MOSS: Closely
connected to Earth--
in the belief of the ancient
philosophers that I like best,
and the belief of Plutarch
and people like him,
and the neo-platonists
in Greece,
for example, the astral
realm of the Moon
is the realm through
which we pass on our way
to higher realms, and in which
we live behind an energy body,
sometimes called
the astral body,
that we're not going
to use anymore.
It's also the realm
through which many of us
transit on our way to
incarnation on Earth.
>>REGINA: Yes, and that's
a hermetic belief, as well.
This is our transit place
back and forth where we learn.
We make decisions,
come back to Earth--
this lunar path.
>>MOSS: Yes, so what's
accessible in the astral realm
of the moon?
Well, maybe it's a
place of understanding
some aspects of transitions
after death and before birth.
I think it's very useful in
life to understand something
about what happens
before physical birth,
and even before conception,
a little bit about what
happens after physical death.
The astral realm
of the Moon is not
the beginning of
the end of it all,
but it's an interesting
transition place.
And the spirits
and intelligences
of the realm of the Moon
have interesting things
to contribute.
So the book contains
conversations
with a being who I call, and
who is content to be called,
a daimon of Luna.
He has, if you ask
him, other names,
but that's the
generic name for him.
And he talks a little bit
about his observations
of human comings and
goings, and goings
in the realm of the Moon,
of different entities there
that might be
influential among humans.
I didn't include his guide
to the shopping precincts
of the astral
realm of the Moon--
>>REGINA: Oh, we'll
get into that.
>>MOSS: But they're
very expensive.
They're very expensive.
>>REGINA: OK, so
first of all, he
said there are very
ancient lineage of beings.
Tell us what he showed you
of them, of their presence.
And he said they live in
the Moon-- not on the Moon,
but in the Moon.
So let's talk about
this order of beings.
>>MOSS: Well, there are
different orders of beings.
His particular order of
beings feel a responsibility
to intelligences from a higher
level, particularly associated,
I would say, the
Sirius star system--
the sun behind the sun.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>MOSS: I'm getting shivers
as I say that to you.
>>REGINA: Yes, that makes sense.
>>MOSS: I think, in a sense,
he regards himself and his
particular group of daimons
of Luna as intermediaries,
gatekeepers, assistants--
>>REGINA: Which they
would have to be.
>>MOSS: --drivers,
chauffeurs for beings
who are operating from a
higher level and beings
who might be able to
ascend to those levels
after doing certain things
in the realm of the Moon.
>>REGINA: OK, and this overlays
with the hermetics text
on this, as well.
>>MOSS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And also, a man
named Walter Cruttenden--
I don't know where it's landed
in the world of astrophysics.
But he had hypothesized
as an amateur astrologer
at a very high level.
He holds conferences on this
and brings out the big guns,
and that the sun was in a binary
star system, which I think
is now accepted.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: And he was positing
that that binary star, if you
go through the lens of the
ancient Egyptians, is Sirius.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: And the two
are companions stars.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Right?
>>MOSS: I think that's correct.
I think that's correct.
>>REGINA: And I'm saying it
would make your story, really,
very coherent.
>>MOSS: Yes.
Yes.
I think it's a
coherent story, even
if it sounds a little bit creaky
and antiquated in the language.
Because actually, in
some ways, these things
were probably easier to
understand 5,000 years ago
in Egypt than they are today
because the channels were not
so blurred, and
because the clouds
of psychic pollution
around the planet
were not as thick
as they've become.
It's become harder for
us to attain or return
to direct knowledge of
some of these things
because the psycho-spiritual
realm around the Earth
is contaminated and confused.
>>REGINA: Yes, and we are going
to get into that toward the end
of our conversation, so stay
put everybody because we need
to get into why so many of
us are not dreaming anymore--
>>MOSS: Yes, we do.
>>REGINA: And this is
going to be part of it.
But in the Egyptian day, these
were things were understood.
They were honored.
They were practiced.
It was part of the
collective mindset.
The apertures and
this sacred spaces
were oriented towards
Sirius, and so forth.
So this was something that
was accepted and known
in the day of levels
of high knowledge.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let's go back
to your man, your daemon
or diamon, and his
explanation of his people.
I like what you've said so far.
So they're gatekeepers,
drivers, so to speak-- guides--
that both assist
human beings that
are transiting beyond the Earth
experience into other realms,
but also in the
reincarnation process, then?
>>MOSS: Yes, quite possibly,
and also in setting up
temporary or indefinite
residence in the realm
of the Moon, itself.
Because there are
intelligences, beings
from this Earth who choose to
stay on that level of access
and observation to the
Earth for various reasons,
sometimes quite good reasons.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: They would like to
keep an eye on the Earth,
intercede in the minds
of people on this Earth,
and give them information
from their point of view.
And from the ramparts of
the astral realm of Luna,
so to speak, they
might have access to us
and be able to intercede
in effective ways.
>>REGINA: Yes, and he gave you
some very specific information
speaking about the soul
path of individuals,
that every person, every
being comes in with a path
that they have chosen to walk.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: And yet, he
was explaining to you,
you can make that
choice before birth.
You can be given the--
you can see the key dates
through your cosmic influences
of astrology, and
so forth, where
you get a green light or
a red light on something.
But that there are no
guarantees against what
he called acts of god.
And so explain
this a little bit.
>>MOSS: Well, I think it's
certainly in my personal
mythology, and maybe in his
guidebook to the cosmos--
all of us to come here with
a soul agreement, some kind
of basic set of
clauses and conditions
we accepted before we came here.
It might seem very strange to
us in the midst of our life
that we could
possibly have chosen
certain things
that are happening
or are going on around--
>>REGINA: No, I'm
with you on that.
>>MOSS: But everything
is subject to negotiation
to a certain extent,
and things are also
subject to interruption.
There are things that can
cut a life purpose short,
that can cut a destiny short,
that can cut a lifeline short.
There are interceptions
and interruptions,
so it's not predestined.
>>REGINA: There are accidents.
>>MOSS: There are
accidents, yes.
Yes.
>>REGINA: And so he
talked about that.
He also talked about what
happens with the soul who
has almost become
like a criminal mind,
and who has slowed
their own progress down,
or they've become degraded.
Because we're talking about
how through many different
traditions in this in-between
place, life is looked over,
it's analyzed, it's decided how
to proceed into the next one.
But as he was telling you,
as a soul becomes degraded,
those choices are not the same.
They're greatly narrowed.
>>MOSS: Right.
>>REGINA: Explain
what he meant by that.
>>MOSS: Right.
Well, we are
surrounded by people
who are soul-gone, actually.
This is at the root of
many of our problems
socially, politically,
et cetera.
But we are surrounded
by people, including
people in places
of power, who don't
have inside their being anymore
the higher intelligence, higher
purpose, sense of conscience--
>>REGINA: So it would seem.
>>MOSS: --that makes us human.
So it would seem.
So what happens to
these people in the end?
I think it's a
story that I'm not
competent to answer directly.
I mean, one would like
to think sometimes
that these degraded
intellects, these degraded soul
combinations can somehow
be dissolved and vanished.
But we live in a world of
competing powers and the cosmos
of competing powers,
competing intelligences,
competing agendas.
So I don't know it's
as simple as that.
What I do know, and here, I
want to go back to the dreaming.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: Can we do
that for a moment?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: What I do
know as a dreamer is
that one of the ways for all
of us, in any circumstance,
to get back in touch
with soul, to get back
in touch with purpose,
to get back in touch
with meaning and conscience
is to recover our dreams.
And one of the most
frightening things to me
about the state of
our society, the theme
of some of the stories
and mysterious realities,
actually, is that
so many of us today
are suffering a dream drought.
We are, in fact, bereft of
the dreams of the night.
We might have all
sorts of practices.
We might do yoga, or Kung Fu,
or meditation, or whatever.
But we don't have the natural,
ongoing nightly relationship
with dreams that most
traditional cultures
have prized and valued.
Why?
Because dreams
show us how we are.
They hold up a magic mirror
to our actions and attitudes,
and because they
show us the future
and they show us our
connection with beings
in other times and places.
And they put us in touch with
a wiser source of knowledge
than the ordinary mind.
So if we've lost
our dreams, we might
have lost the voice of
conscience, the voice of soul,
the voice of deeper wisdom.
And what can we do about that?
Well, there is a
shamanic answer to this,
which I want to really speak
on this very important occasion
with you, Regina.
The shamanic answer is if you've
lost your dreams, consider
the fact that you
might have lost
the beautiful bright
dreamer in you,
and you might have lost
at some point in life--
>>REGINA: Soul-fragmentation.
>>MOSS: Soul-fragmentation,
soul-loss-- soul-loss
would be the shamans'
essential diagnosis.
And how could that happen?
Well, maybe, you
remember, even if vaguely,
a moment in your life
when the world seemed
so cold and so cruel you
didn't want to be here.
You wanted to be somewhere else.
You wanted to be in a
garden behind the Moon.
You want to be in
grandma's house.
You wanted to be
anywhere but here.
Maybe you wished yourself dead.
It could have
happened at any age.
happened very young.
It could have happened to the
beautiful, bright teenager
who's shamed or
violated in some way.
Part of you wanted
to go away and wanted
so hard to go away that she
did go away, is not with you--
soul loss, in shamanic terms.
And who is she?
Who is this person?
This might be the dreamer.
This might be the one who
never lost her dreams.
But when you lost her,
you lost your dreams.
So what I'm saying is
that maybe the antidote
to the loss of dreams and
the loss of connection
with conscience and deeper
wisdom that that brings
is for us to find
ways to call back
the beautiful, bright dreamer.
The magical child may
be in each of our lives.
This is what interests
me profoundly.
This is actually at
the center of my work
as a teacher and healer at
this time-- helping people
to connect again to
the inner child, maybe
the magical child who is the
beautiful, bright dreamer.
Because when she comes home,
when you can get her home,
persuade her that you
are safe and you are fun,
your dreams come back.
>>REGINA: Yes, and this is
something I wanted to find
out--
you've been doing
this a long time.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Are you
seeing a difference,
quantitatively or qualitatively,
in people's dreams,
in conferences and
workshops you do now
versus 10, 20, 30 years ago?
>>MOSS: I see and feel
a hunger for this,
which is a much livelier hunger,
much more eager and voracious
hunger than I remember
20 or 25 years ago.
I think more people are aware
that something is missing
and they want to get it back.
And I also see in my own work--
in the workshops, online
courses, and so on that I do--
I see an immediacy of results.
If I say to someone, OK,
you don't have your dreams,
can we help you
call up the memory
of that occasion
from your childhood,
or better still, a dream
from your childhood self?
And can we use that maybe
as a time tunnel for you
to go back to your
childhood self
and play counselor,
protector, cheerleader for her
in her own time?
And maybe in the process,
bring something of her back
to your present self?
And someone might say,
well, I'd like to try,
but how do I do that safely?
Well, I might then say to
them-- because I'm a shamanic
dreamer--
I might say, OK, why don't
we connect you with an ally?
Why do we connect with
Great Mother Bear who's
going to come with you and
put her immense potency,
and her love and
protection and blessing
all around you, so when you
meet your childhood self,
it's not alone.
You have Great Mother
Bear holding you together.
The results from this
kind of approach,
Regina, are astonishing.
I mean, they're astonishing.
How--
>>REGINA: Because it's a
matter of calling back.
>>MOSS: Yes, it's a
matter of calling--
>>REGINA: You can consciously
call back a part of you.
>>MOSS: --something
that belongs to you.
It belongs to you.
And also, because, we're also
talking about our relationship
with time, here.
>>REGINA: Yes,
let's get into that.
>>MOSS: I mean, this is
trans-temporal stuff,
and some of my stories are
about trans-temporal stuff.
The fact that from
this moment of now,
we might have the capacity
to travel into the past
and be present at least
in the mind of someone
living in the past, whether
it's a younger self,
or a person in a past life,
or an ancestral being.
We might not only be able to go
there and have a look around.
We might be able to
communicate at least mentally
with that person
in their own time.
I believe this to be so.
I think it's actually
one of the things that's
kept my life together to the
extent it's stayed together.
So we can travel
into parallel lives.
We can look at that
Regina or that Robert who
made a different choice
and talk to them,
maybe, negotiate with them.
Can we do something
for each other?
You did this so well.
I haven't done that yet.
Can you help me out?
Well, yeah, I could offer
you something in return.
We might be able to try that.
So but with the
younger self, to be
able to go back to your
younger self using a dream
or memory for a time tunnel, be
counselor, protective, mentor
for her in her own time,
and bring her energy
and imagination, that's
a really delicious idea.
>>REGINA: It is.
And on that, I think
this is a good time
to segue into you in
the parallel you, who
wrote this amazing book
called "Blue World."
The parallel you--
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: You didn't know
the difference in the moment.
So let's talk about it because
I think it's fascinating,
and it ties in with
what you just said.
>>MOSS: Well, I'm aware that
amongst my many parallel
Roberts, there
are writers who've
done things I have not done
as a writer in my reality.
And one of the most interesting
of these parallel Robert
writers is the one who
completed a book called
"The Blue World,"
which was going
to be a bit of sort of Harry
Potter of the dream world
kind of stuff, and more.
And I embarked upon
it many years ago,
and I had other things to do.
I interrupted myself.
I came at it again.
I left it again.
He finished it.
He's been very successful.
He's done a couple since.
They're a whole series.
There are movies.
He is a beloved storyteller.
>>REGINA: So let's drop into
your cocktail party with him.
[LAUGHS]
>>MOSS: So I find myself at
The New York Public Library,
and it's a big event.
It's all for me.
It's over Robert Moss.
There's my name.
And there are these book jackets
I don't quite recognize--
>>REGINA: Posters.
>>MOSS: Posters, yes,
including "The Blue World."
And there's waiters
with champagne.
I try to get a drink and nobody
pays any attention to me,
as if I'm a ghost.
And I go into the-- there's
an auditorium there.
I don't know whether
the New York Public
Library has an auditorium
quite like this,
but it's full of families with
piles of Robert Moss' books.
And there's the microphone,
and I think, oh, great,
so I'll get up on stage.
Then I see a parallel Robert.
He's better dressed than I am.
His hair is better kempt.
>>REGINA: He had nice
shoes on, I recall.
>>MOSS: Very nice shoes,
very nice Oxford brogues,
or something like that, instead
of my scuffed walking shoes.
He looks really good.
He's lightly tanned.
He looks quite--
>>REGINA: You said his skin
looked really-- almost--
yeah, lightly tanned, beautiful.
>>MOSS: He is slightly--
he's beautiful.
He's beautiful.
And I think, OK, well, OK, maybe
this is my dream self, right?
I can jump in to his
situation, give this talk.
And they're talking about all
his best-selling positions
and his sales.
It's all good.
And I try to get
into his situation.
He says, get the F out of here.
I wrote these books.
You didn't.
Go away.
Don't bother me.
By God, I've just met
my parallel self who's
done something great
that I haven't done,
and he's not letting me in.
And I come out of this and
I start laughing at myself.
I think you know, he's right.
I would've played it the
same way in his situation.
But since then, since the
story, Regina, I've gone
and I've had lunch with him and
in a dream-like, non-ordinary
reality.
We've made a sort of tentative
deal to help each other out.
But I have yet to sort of take
the actions that requires,
so I can't report on
the results just yet.
But what does this mean
to anybody else watching?
Maybe it means this--
maybe if you discover you
have a parallel self who
did some interesting
things you haven't done,
maybe you could
actually investigate
bringing some those gifts,
some of that access,
some of those connections,
some of those skills
into your present life.
Maybe you could-- why
not give it a try?
What's to be lost?
>>REGINA: Oh, you're
giving me some ideas here.
I mean, usually it's things
we've thought of and thought,
ah, I probably couldn't do that.
I don't have time or I wouldn't
get the support I needed,
so we kind of let
those dreams go.
So you're basically
saying, pick up
on the thread of those
dreams, those things
that really lit our jets--
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: --and see
where that takes us.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: Because that
would bring back alive
again that version
of us that originally
had those dreams and those
intensely warm feelings.
>>MOSS: Well said.
And maybe we can't catch up
to all that parallel self has
done, having devoted all these
years to something that we
didn't--
>>REGINA: He's down the
road on "Blue Road."
>>MOSS: Yeah.
>>REGINA: "The Blue World."
>>MOSS: But we can
bring something.
I mean, I have an artist Rob.
I loved art when I was
a kid, painted a lot.
There's a parallel
Robert, the painter,
who has skills I will
never develop in this life.
I can say that
for certain, sure.
But when I think of him, I do a
lot more drawing and coloring,
watercolor pencils, et cetera.
So my own art has come alive.
I'll never paint in oils,
probably, the way that he does,
but just a sense of
connection with him
makes me feel happy,
makes me feel cheerful,
makes me want to pick up
the colors and do something.
>>REGINA: I love it.
Are you going to do
"Blue World," or not?
It sounds like a
fascinating book.
>>MOSS: I have a project for
this winter when I'll actually
be at home for six
weeks, off the road.
We'll see.
>>REGINA: OK, well, we'll see.
And then maybe he'll let
you have a cocktail with him
down the road.
[LAUGHS]
>>MOSS: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: So this notion,
though, now going back
to-- because I think
we can inter-splice
some of the comments from the
daimon entity throughout this.
Because he's also explaining to
you that the nature of living
in this particular--
this reality,
this third/fourth-dimensional
human realm is--
he called it a relentless
forward moving of time,
and that sounds very
harsh and limiting to me.
>>MOSS: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: What did
he mean by that?
>>MOSS: Well, I can't speak
for him at this moment
because he's not in
my mind right now.
And as you use some
of the phrases,
I have to grope around,
remember exactly what
I was reporting at that time.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MOSS: That is not
actually my opinion.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>MOSS: I'm talking
to an entity who
I think is more than
an aspect of myself.
I think he is a trans-personal
entity who has his own views.
And his views are
not necessarily
to be taken as 100% correct.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: I'm getting
myself into--
>>REGINA: These are just his--
>>MOSS: I'm getting myself
into trouble again, now.
But--
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>MOSS: I think that time
is much more malleable,
much more flexible than that--
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's
what it sounds like.
>>MOSS: --fragment
would suggest.
>>REGINA: Yes, and that's
why I underscored it
because this is not in
alignment with your experience
and what you're saying.
So we're going to
let that one go.
The only other one I
wanted to bring up out
of that whole
chapter was something
you made a comment on.
And I'm only bringing
it up for this reason--
people seem to be in
despair, and a lot
of people, a huge percentage
of the world's population
are in despair and under
pressure and exhausted.
And one thing he did mention to
you is the notion of suicide,
saying when you have
a social contract,
you're here to
live that contract,
and suicide is not really the
best option for you as a soul,
on a soul level.
Do you remember much about
that part of it and why?
>>MOSS: Well, I mean, ending
your life at a certain point,
whether it's
suicide or through--
>>REGINA: Negligence.
>>MOSS: --illness or negligence,
or such might, in a sense,
be part of the
circumstances you agreed to.
It might be in your
soul agreement.
And there are things that amount
to slow suicide, aren't there?
I mean, things that--
habits that we take
up which are not
the action of shooting
yourself with a gun
or jumping off a cliff,
but in a sense you know
are going to take you out
sooner than you might.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: I think it's
always foolish in life
to think that you can
get out of a situation
by jumping out of
this body in this life
and going somewhere else,
whether it's just a black hole,
or it's a place of
respite and sanctuary.
I don't think it's like that.
I think whatever you're
living in this life will
continue to have consequences.
And your story does
not end with death,
whether the death is by
suicide or in some other way.
And I think that
many people who take
themselves out early
through suicide then
have to go through the process
of awakening to the fact
that this didn't end,
does not end the situation
you are trying to escape.
Having said that, I have
great sympathy for people
who feel they have the
right to take themselves out
because they're suffering
incredible pain--
>>REGINA: Yeah, I do, too.
And who wants that?
>>MOSS: --incredible
deterioration, or perhaps
for noble reasons,
for the protection
of a cause or a family, or
something like in wartime,
something like that.
So there is a case.
There's a case for
justifiable suicide.
I would not say that suicide is
wrong under all circumstances.
But my mind goes
to the situation
of people who take
themselves out
because they find the world
too tough, too harsh, too
unsatisfactory, and think that
they're ending the problem.
You're not ending the problem.
>>REGINA: Right, yeah.
>>MOSS: I've had no theology
about all of this, Regina.
But I do know as a dreamer,
as a lifelong active dreamer,
that consciousness
survives physical death.
I know that.
I've known that all my life.
And I know that it's a
boy who died and came back
through what we now call
near-death experiences, also.
So I know that whatever
the consequences of what
we did or failed to do in
this life, they continue.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: The waves go on.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MOSS: So--
>>REGINA: If you can draw
within yourself the power
to be able to balance
it while you're
embodied, all the better.
You don't have to
carry it forward.
>>MOSS: I've found that it's
terribly necessary for those
of us who've lost someone in our
ambit, in our friends or family
to suicide to recognize that
part of our responsibility
now is probably going to
be to offer forgiveness.
Because often, they're
now seeking forgiveness
for the pain that they
caused and for the task left
unaccomplished, and to call in
guidance and blessing for them
in their new path.
Because sometimes they,
having killed themselves,
might go into the
strange enormity
of trying to call someone
to them from this life
in their loneliness,
and might try
to draw someone else into
a kind of suicide pact.
That happens so often.
You see it amongst kids.
You also see it amongst
adults, as well.
So we've got to be wary of that.
We've also got to be wary of
people who condemn themselves
to some kind of damnation
in thinking that they've
committed a terrible sin now.
So our role is going to
be to be helpers, assist
the imaginations of the dead,
as Yeats said we could do,
in general.
And call in God's blessing
and protection for everyone
involved, and remember
that forgiveness
is the great healer.
>>REGINA: Beautifully said.
We only have time for a
couple more "stories,"
and I'm going to
give you a choice.
But one of them I thought
was interesting was--
oh, you, here, were talking
about happy hour for the dead,
but we'll get there later.
I thought we'd do a
quick stop with Carl
Jung and his other world, the
other world of Bollingen. How
do you say it?
"Bowl-engin"?
>>MOSS: "Ball-in-gen."
>>REGINA: "Ball-in-gen."
>>MOSS: "Ball-in-gen.
Ball-in-gen."
>>REGINA: "Ball-in-gen."
>>MOSS: If we're
going to be Germanic.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no please.
>>MOSS: It's a German name.
>>REGINA: I didn't
know how to say it.
>>MOSS: "Ball-in-gen."
No, no, I mean--
>>REGINA: "Ball-in-gen."
>>MOSS: They say
"Ball-in-gen" in Switzerland.
Well, I mean, it's a story
about a couple of encounters
that I had with Jung
in the imaginal space.
Let me note that when
I talk about dreaming,
I'm not just talking
about sleep dreams.
about lucid dreams.
I'm not even just talking
about shamanic journeys
or meditation.
I'm talking about our ability
to enter a liminal state
of consciousness.
A lot of my best
dreaming is done
in the space between sleep and
awake, the hypnagogic zone.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MOSS: And I just want to quote
a great source on all of this
to our viewers, which is
Tinkerbell from the Hollywood
movie "Peter Pan."
Tinkerbell said to
Peter when Peter's sad
because he is about to
lose his fairy friend--
she said, look for me in the
place between sleep and awake.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MOSS: There I will
always love you.
There you will find me.
This is great technical advice--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MOSS: --the place
between sleep and awake.
So I want to notice,
for those who
would like to get deeper into
a practice out of all this,
that spending more time in the
twilight state between sleep
and awake is a great way
to become a lucid dreamer.
It's a great way to tap into
trans-personal and inner
sources of information
and guidance
that might be available to you.
We are creative.
We're psychic.
We put things together in a
creative way much more easily.
So that's where a lot of
these things come from.
So my story of young
is a story of a couple
of encounters with him.
But they are connected to
what we know about his life
from those who
were close to him.
We know that in the
last years of his life,
Jung dreamed again
and again of what
he called the other Bollingen.
Now Bollingen with his
name for his retreat
on Lake Zurich near the
small village of Bollingen,
where he built a tower.
And he did amazing
murals and mosaics,
and carved a huge cube of
stone with mystical devices,
and put above the
doorway, invoked
or uninvoked the god is
present, and did all this stuff,
and worked with his
hands like a craftsman,
made himself big meaty
Swiss German peasant stews
because Jung was a man of
the earth and the people.
Anyway, but before
he died, he started
dreaming of another
version of this thing
on the other side of death.
And he said that these dreams
gave him absolute confidence
that he knew where
to go when he died.
And I think in the
last of these dreams,
he saw some kind of water
animal, a mother animal.
I've forgotten what it was--
beaver or muskrat, something
like that, a
wolverine, perhaps--
with her children in the
water, playing in the water.
This made him very
happy again, felt
confidence he knew
where he was going.
Well, I had a
couple of encounters
with my version of Jung.
I'm not going to
be grandiose enough
to say this is Jung the spirit,
or this is the essence of Jung.
Let's say the Jung that I
love and respect gives me
a partial tour of
the other Bollingen.
He won't show me more
than a few things.
I mean, this is a
protected environment.
And if it is the place
where he's living,
he's not going to show me
more than a few things.
But the hilarious part,
the really comedic part
in the story is he gives me a
glimpse of the book that he's
been writing on the other side.
We know about "The Red Book."
This is The Purple
Book, and it's
called "The Book of Heaven."
The title in Latin means
"The Book of Heaven."
And he'll only show me--
he'll show me hardly anything.
He shows me the title
of the introduction.
The title of the introduction
is "Why I Am Not a Jungian."
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS]
>>MOSS: So I think some
of my Jungian friends
are probably furious with
this, and some are-- perhaps
some are laughing up
their sleeves over it.
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>MOSS: So it's a somewhat
comedic version of what
Jung's afterlife might be like.
>>REGINA: And also, as you wrote
about it in this experience you
had, his other "Balling-gun?"
>>MOSS: "Ball-in-gen."
>>REGINA: "Balling-gen"
was much more colorful.
The colors didn't
exist in this realm.
So it was everything,
but kind of
supercharged in terms of
light and sound and frequency.
>>MOSS: Yes, it's fantastic
what has been done there
with the mosaics.
There are mosaics going
up inside the tower, which
are like an incredibly
flourishing tree of life--
not just the Kabbalistic
tree of life,
but a tree rich in all the
colors of nature and colors
beyond the natural world.
So it's a beautiful
thing to see.
>>REGINA: Beautiful.
And because you brought up this
notion of the liminal state
between dreaming
and wakefulness,
this is something--
I'm bringing it up
because recently, I
realized my husband
was talking to me when
I was in the in-between
place, and it
was very confusing for him.
Because I notice-- and I'm
bringing this up because it has
to be many people have this
experience, yourself included--
you close your eyes
and you're not asleep,
but immediately, you're
in another world.
There are players that
are involved with you.
You're carrying on
conversations very quickly,
and you can't really
tell the difference
between the time and seconds
ago when you were awake.
And I'll be having
conversations.
And he'll enter
in from his world
and ends up in my conversations
with other people in this state
in-between, and he's not
clear what's going on.
So what's happening
when you have
a whole cast of characters,
whole planets and scenery
and everything
happening so quickly,
just seconds away from where
you were when you're not asleep
yet?
>>MOSS: Well, I think
it's actually exactly
as you're describing
very vividly.
I think we're
stepping in and out
of not only different
states of consciousness,
we're stepping in and
out of different scenes,
different realities,
even different worlds,
and they're right there.
I mean, I often feel when
I'm returning from a dream,
whether it's a sleep
dream or this kind
of liminal experience,
as if I have literally,
in a just-so fashion, stepped
from one room into another.
>>REGINA: That's what it feels.
>>MOSS: And it's ceased
to be confusing for me.
But I sometimes won't
write down the experiences
because they're both so
literal mystic and realistic.
I was with them.
Now I'm over here.
OK, that's fine.
I know them.
Will I be with them
again tomorrow night?
Let's wait and see.
I think that we are
multidimensional beings
and our ability to handle and
interpret this and apply it
to an ordinary reality
is limited by the fact
that we live in a
three-dimensional reality
plus time.
That's how we are.
And if we try to operate beyond
that with our physical bodies,
we'll probably get into trouble.
But we're talking now about the
fact that in our larger selves,
in the larger universe, we
are multidimensional beings
and we are active and engaged on
more than one plane of reality.
And some of these other
realities, by the way,
have their own physics.
There are other realities
you go to you actually
can't jump off the rooftop and
fly because it's not kind of--
>>REGINA: Oh, I
go to that world,
too, where I can bound from
mountaintop to mountaintop
in a single bound, yeah.
>>MOSS: Maybe you can do that,
but that's still not flying.
So you might bound from the
mountaintops, but not fly.
So there are--
>>REGINA: And
sometimes it's flying.
>>MOSS: And sometimes
it's flying.
>>REGINA: It all depends.
>>MOSS: And sometimes
it's breathing underwater
and sometimes it's not.
>>REGINA: Different physics.
>>MOSS: Different physics.
>>REGINA: I breathe
underwater in dreams, too.
>>MOSS: Yes.
But it becomes very
interesting, doesn't it,
to discover that we are
in other universes that
have their own physics.
We might have superpowers
compared to what we have here,
but they're not necessarily
infinite powers.
There are still physical laws
at work in these universes.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>MOSS: So what are
we learning about?
We're learning
about the richness,
the plenitude of the
multidimensional universe.
And let me say, Regina,
when we come back the fact
that people are feeling sad and
depressed and frustrated and
angry about the horrible
things going on in our world,
this is not escapism
to say maybe it
will be helpful to
remember that you are also
a citizen of the multi-verse,
the multidimensional universe.
You have other possibilities.
You have other connections.
You have other games to play.
You have other places to fly.
And maybe you can--
by spending some more
time there consciously,
you can bring some joy and
some juice back of this world.
>>REGINA: Absolutely, in that
imaginable realm because that's
also where our creations occur.
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so if people
don't-- they say, oh,
they're just a daydreamer,
off in their own world.
Good for you.
This is something
we need to reclaim--
our right to daydream--
not just night-dream,
but daydream,
and create these
beautiful realities.
So--
>>MOSS: Yes.
>>REGINA: --any final comment?
I think what you talked
about a little while ago,
about if you want to dream, if
you've lost your dreams, call
that part of you back.
Call the dreamer back, right?
>>MOSS: And make
a social practice
out of sharing a
story with a friend.
It doesn't have to be a
dream-- a personal story--
and learn how to do
that in a way that
is fast and fun, and
mutually sustaining.
When we share stories or dreams,
we say, if it were my story,
it were my dream, I'd
think such and such,
and then this is
what I'd do about it.
I might do some
shamanic shopping.
So having a way to
socialize all of this
and bring something to
the table with a friend
is one of the great
incentives to bring a dream.
Or if you don't have a
dream, bring a story anyway.
>>REGINA: I agree.
And I just have to
say, on that note,
I have a couple
friends that just
laugh at the ridiculousness.
If I need something
in the physical realm,
I'm shown a picture.
It comes in from somewhere.
I'm shown a picture
of where to go.
I'll go there.
It will be there and it will
usually be half-off, OK.
>>MOSS: I love it.
>>REGINA: It just works like
that to such an absurd extent
that I always call this one
friend and she just says,
I hate you.
>>MOSS: [LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: How does this work?
>>MOSS: I think it's great.
>>REGINA: I need
some new guides.
But so it's not
surprising that I
would go to my favorite little
places in that dream world,
as well.
And it's not all--
it sounds like I'm like a
shopaholic in dream-time.
I'm not, that's
just here and there.
So anyway, Robert, it's
been absolutely delightful.
I think that you've
opened up people's minds
to give us permission to really
put dream-state, both awake
and asleep, as a priority
in center stage in our life.
To start creating this vital,
alive, colorful reality
that so many of us
have lost touch with,
certainly by the time or
seven or eight years old.
>>MOSS: What a dream
conversation, Regina.
Thank you so much.
And let's all remember
if we can dream it,
we might be able to do it.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Thank you.
>>MOSS: Thank you.
>>REGINA: The title of Robert's
book is "Mysterious Realities."
You can also take a look
at my previous interviews
with Robert in the Conscious
Media Network and Gaia archives
by searching his name there.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]